the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
and so on today's handout we're
continuing to think about color we're
also going to think about magnetism some
more and we're going to think about more
types of geometries so we've seen that
the type of ligand whether it's a weak
field intermediate field or strong field
ligand makes a difference in terms of
the splitting energy
how much the D orbitals are split due to
the presence of the ligand arraigned in
octahedral geometry but we'll see that
the geometry matters that if you
different kinds of geometries then the
splitting is going to be different
between the D orbitals so now we're
going to look and I'll set this up we're
gonna look at a nickel demo which will
have in a few minutes but first let's
think about the colors that we're gonna
see so if we have a nickel chloride
compound that is greenish what kind
it'll absorb then what kind of light if
it is a greenish kind of color what what
color would it absorb then red reddish
which is what kind of wavelength long or
short long right so we're gonna get a
long reddish kind of will absorb along
or red wavelength and so if we're
resorbing a long wavelength what would
be true about the splitting energy is it
going to be a big or small splitting
energy so first what if you have long
wavelength what's the frequency long or
short short and so the energy would be
short as well right so it's going to be
a small small energy associated with it
just a small splitting and to remember
what we what we learned about chloride -
what kind of a ligand is it it's a weak
field ligand so this makes sense so a
weak field ligand only splits the field
a little bit it's not a very strong
ligand so it can only split it so much
alright now we're going to take this
greenish compound and we're gonna add
some water to it and that's gonna make
it a little more blue be sort of a
Bluegreen and let's think about what's
happening there so if and we'll compare
it to what we have above so now if it
looks Bluegreen what sort of color is
going to be what's absorbed
right so we're gonna have sort of a
you're gonna have a more orange red
color here and so that's gonna be longer
or shorter than the one above shorter
right so we're we were here now we're
moving a more into the orange region so
we're going to be absorbing a wavelength
that's a bit shorter so is the energy
going to be larger or smaller yeah so
it's going to be a larger energy because
we have a shorter wavelength so we're
gonna have a bit of a higher frequency
and so we'll have a higher energy or
larger energy and you remember what kind
of ligand water is it's sort of it's an
intermediate field ligand so it's going
to be stronger than chloride so chloride
was very weak water sort of in the
middle and then we had cyanide as an
example of a very strong field ligand
all right so this makes sense that that
would be a bit stronger so we have a
larger splitting now they're going to
break the sample into two and batch one
is gonna you're gonna add EDTA that was
our chelating agent that we talked about
before and that's gonna make it even a
bit more blue and here we have our model
of EDTA bound to our metal and so if we
think about this then if it's a bit more
blue so we're going to be absorbing a
color that's even more Orange and so
that's going to be even shorter than
what we had there so then our our
splitting energy the energy is going to
be what larger or smaller yeah so be
even larger and I've never told you what
kind of ligand EDTA is but from this if
you're getting a larger splitting you
would predict it's a stronger ligand
than water and in fact it is an even
stronger one than water and again this
is you know we're gonna be increasing
entropy in this room in a few minutes
because we're going to be displacing six
water molecules with one molecule of
EDTA which will bind to your metal with
six points of attachment so watch out
for that entropy change alright so that
was batch one now we're going to take
some of this nickel hexa aqua hexa aqua
compound and we're gonna mix it with
another chelating agent so remember our
water complexes blue-green and we're
gonna add another chelating agent and
now it's going to become red and so if
it's red what color is going to be
absorbed green and so this wavelength
then is going to be what compared to
orange yeah so it's even way shorter we
were kind of right up here now we've all
the way shifted down here so it's way
shorter so the energy is gonna be what
small or big it's gonna be very big but
this isn't an octahedral system anymore
so I didn't have a little oh by my
energy and it's actually a square planar
system so we're not going to do a sort
of a direct comparison here but this
tells us that in square planar you're
probably going to get pretty big
splitting of our D orbital energies
because we can get something that the
colors suggest that there must be a big
splitting all right so those are what
we're predicting for the colors let's
see what happens okay so this is the
nickel chloride complex the Kathy was
talking about as most you guys can see
it's very green put it under here you
could probably obviously see that it's
green maybe against this background for
that it's very green Thank You Lina okay
so we don't need that to be that which
can poured into the water so when we
pour this into the water we're expecting
you guys remember
and that's very obviously not that clear
wonderful well it's it's it's kind of
blue green yeah right around the color
that you'd expect for water to be we
should switch gloves from green to blue
green as we do the experiment you can
see it a little bit better there maybe I
don't know trust us now we're gonna next
one's a little more dramatic just put
this up into two solutions should I pick
a different color of gloves and we're
gonna add some EDTA thank you we're
gonna add some EDTA into this and the
EDTA is where it's a powder so EDTA is
relatively insoluble in water so we're
gonna add a little bit of base to make
sure this works that's not the base
that's okay so let's start with the EDTA
I'm gonna use this to mix I think
I don't think so this is gonna be a
little bit reactive
that worked pretty well actually look at
that yeah it's blue by comparison right
yeah it's a little bit more blue and as
we added some hydroxide it are not a
drug side acetate it allowed the EDTA
dissolve just a little bit more which is
why it reacted okay cool so now for the
last thing we will add alright dmg and
we apologize to Kathy because it smells
really really bad this you're not
actually gonna see a whole lot of color
change and the reason for that is
because this is not quite as good
so the dmg has to come in and actually
replace the water and it's actually kind
of hard for DM dmg to replace water so
we're gonna do now is we're gonna add a
little bit of ammonia and the ammonia
can replace the water a little bit
better than the dmg can theirs right and
then dmg can and that dmg is gonna
replace the ammonia and you'll see
something kind of cool it's actually
going to very locally change color and I
might actually do this okay let's give
this a shot well I can't I can't reach
them
yeah so you can see the local map so it
goes back to being Bluegreen again
because the concentration of ammonia
that we're adding is not quite enough to
counteract the amount of water that's
already in here but if we add enough
eventually it will turn thank you
totally totally red but for right now
you can see it it's an equilibrium
reaction yeah and it talks about sort of
also rates of reactions as rates of
exchange and that's our next unit well
that's a good waiting for the next time
all right okay all right all right thank
you guys so you saw that red color
develop and so it's not just about
whether something's a strong or weak
field ligand it's also about the
geometry so we're going to talk later
about square planar geometry so keep in
mind that we did expect that there
should be some splitting between those D
orbitals but before we get to to square
planar we're going to do tetrahedral so
here is our tetrahedral system here's my
little drawing of tetrahedral and I have
my tetrahedral model here and so here
we're going to have our kind of
tetrahedral coordinate frame like this
where we have two ligands kind of in the
plane of the screen one legging coming
out at you and one ligand going back and
so now we're going to think about how
our different sets of D orbitals are
going to be affected by tetrahedral
geometry and again remember crystal
field theory is just saying that the
ligands are like negative point charges
pointing toward the D orbitals so when
the ligand and the D orbital are near
each other big repulsion when they're
farther away less repulsion so let's
look at this this case
now and so here we see this in this
geometry our ligands are now off axis
right here here is the z axis here's the
y axis here's the x axis our ligands are
off axis so our orbital sets that are
also kind of off axis are going to be
more affected than our orbital sets that
were on axis so this is different from
what we saw with the octahedral geometry
so now we have more repulsion between
those negative point charges that are
the ligands and the D orbitals that are
off axis the ones that are 45 degrees
away so our D Y Z D X Y and D and D X C
all right so this is in fact the
opposite of the octahedral case because
in the octahedral case we had the
ligands were on axis and so the orbitals
that were on axis were the most affected
but now tetrahedral ligands off axis so
the orbitals that are off axis are the
most effective so these switch positions
now and D x squared minus y squared DZ
squared they still have the same energy
they're still degenerate with respect to
each other but now these are stabilized
compared to these but they also have the
same energy so all of these three
orbital sets are also of the same energy
also degenerate now one other really
important thing about tetrahedral is not
only is it the opposite I love
octahedral in terms of where those
orbitals are but overall there's sort of
less splitting so even though the
orbitals that are kind of off axis are
more affected by that tetrahedral
geometry than the others still the
ligands aren't really pointing right
toward those orbitals at all they're
closer but they're not right at them so
it's very different from the octahedral
case where you had the orbitals sort of
right on axis and the ligands right on
axis so there's less splitting its
smaller splitting so the octahedral or
the tetrahedral crystal field splitting
energy is this Delta sub T and that's
going to be smaller alright so let's
look now at some crystal field splitting
diagrams and I'm gonna compare the
octahedral case with a tetrahedral case
so here's our octahedral case again we
have our octahedral crystal field
splitting energy our delta o now we have
our tetrahedral crystal field splitting
energy delta T and we see again that
it's opposite orders so our DX x squared
minus y squared DZ squared instead of
being up here as it is with octahedral
is now down here and instead of our eg
we now just have G we are we just lost
the G here and our three sets that were
stabilized compared to the hypothetical
spherical crystal field are now
destabilized because those orbitals at
45 degrees are closer to our tetrahedral
ligands so again we have this switch and
again our eg goes to just G the book
sometimes has a two I don't know where
that came from but should just ignore it
it's just e and T 2g now is just t2 so
again you can see in this picture really
well splitting energies a lot less for
tetrahedral this is much smaller than
the octahedral crystal field splitting
energy so much much smaller because
again none of those ligand point charges
are really directly toward those
orbitals so overall it's less splitting
and because there's less splitting when
you think about putting electrons in to
the system it doesn't take much to go up
here so the pairing energy is going to
always be a lot greater than the energy
to put it in this higher energy orbital
set because it's not very much higher
than the first set so these would all be
high spin systems so we put in our
electrons singly to the fullest extent
possible before we start to before we
start to pair them so you can assume
that all tetrahedral complexes are high
spin
that's a pretty good assumption alright
so just like the tetrahedral case we
have overall we're maintaining the
energy of the system so in the
tetrahedral case we had three orbitals
that were stabilized so they went down
by two two fists and and two that went
up were destabilized so they went up by
three fists to maintain the overall
energy of the system in the tetrahedral
case we have to enter two orbitals that
are stabilized down in energy so they're
down by minus three-fifths and then we
have three up so those are up by two
fifths so same idea but again everything
is opposite all right so let's take a
look at an example of a tetrahedral case
and we'll look at chromium 3 plus so
what is the D count here you can just
tell me find chromium in our table yeah
it's going to be 3 so group 6 minus 3 is
3 and now why don't you tell me how we
were going to put in those three
electrons
all right ten more seconds
okay most people got that right so again
this is not correct for a high spin
which most tetrahedral compounds are
this would be correct this arrangement
of electrons is also correct but if you
look at the orbital names those are
incorrect so on a task you not only need
to you need to be able to write all the
correct orbital names and the correct
designators as well as well as putting
it in the electrons in the right way so
good to practice all right so we put in
now our three electrons over here and
now we can think about our DN
configuration so if you're asked to
write out the D to the n electron
configuration what that's asking you for
is to say how many electrons are in
which of the two orbital levels and so
you would say in the e level here you
have two and in the T two level you have
one and this is just then a shorthand
that's why they have these little
abbreviations you don't have to write
out all the names of your D orbitals
alright so how many unpaired electrons
do we have then we have what three and
if I'm now telling you that this is a
compact complex with chloride and that
the wavelength of the most intensely
absorb light is 740
why don't you predict the color of the
complex for me
okay ten more seconds
yep so we could look and see this
wavelength is going to be in the red so
that the predicted color of the complex
would be the complementary or green and
so green then is one that has you know
it's a pretty short this is a pretty
long wavelength which would be
consistent with a very tiny splitting
energy
all right so now let's think about the
square planar case so our square planar
system is described so we're in the
plane here it's again square planar and
now we have our ligands along the y axis
and the x axis so we have nothing along
the z axis here so tell me based on this
and then again our ligands are on-axis
which of those D orbitals do you think
is going to be the most destabilized by
this geometry what do you think
x squared minus y squared and what would
you think would be next in terms of
destabilized of those sets X Y yep so
that's that's the case so most is going
to be DX squared minus y squared again
those orbitals are on axis ligands on
axis next would be the other one that
has X and y all right so let's take a
look at this now so we have our DX
squared minus y squared our orbitals are
on axis or ligands are on-axis you
really have lots of repulsion so this
would be destabilized the most compared
to all other D orbitals really different
amount of destabilization this is a lot
of repulsion all the ligands are right
toward those orbitals so d Z squared
which used to be degenerate with DX
squared minus y squared now is not
anymore there's a lot less repulsion for
this because there's no ligands along
the z-axis anymore
so let's look at our other orbital set
the next one in terms of being
destabilized is d XY now these orbitals
are off axis so it's not nearly as bad
as for DX squared minus y squared but
compared to everything else so it's it's
a lot more repulsion than everybody else
but it's less than our d x squared minus
y squared and these guys are then going
to be stabilized compared to the others
all right so let's now draw our
splitting diagrams and think about how
this all plays in together and so again
we'll compare it to our octahedral
crystal field so now up the most
destabilized way up here which is this
orbital gonna be next one x squared
minus y squared right that's up in
energy the most so most destabilized
it's experiencing the most repulsion and
then next but much lower down D XY again
the ligands are a law in the XY plane so
that would be set
but those are 45 degrees off-axis so
it's way down in energy compared to the
ones that are on axis and then down here
we kind of have all the rest and it's
usually written with D Z squared here
and then D Y Z and D X Z over here but
the order here these are all kind of
stabilized compared to these two and the
exact order is not quite as firm as in
octahedral or tetrahedral paces so again
this is quite different now overall the
Energy's also maintained but it's
there's too many orbitals and too many
places you're not expected to know that
but one thing that I will point out is
that remember for the demo square planer
we said that had to have a pretty big
splitting that's a really big splitting
of the energy of the orbitals so square
planar complexes can be capable of
having you know big energies of you need
a big energy of your photon to be
absorbed by a square planer or you could
if you're gonna bump it all the way up
there that's really far away all right
so now clicker why don't you tell me
what you think of a square pyramidal
case and this would be this case here
where you have one ligand you have a
square planar geometry basically that
you added an extra ligand to or you had
octahedral you took one away and that
extra ligand is along the z axis so what
things do you think would be true
all right since we're running out of
time let's just take 10 more seconds
all right
so just to put that would be true the D
now there's a ligand along Z so DZ
squared is going to be destabilized in
the square pyramidal case can scare to
the square planar everything that has
Z's in it would also be destabilized and
these would definitely not be degenerate
there's no reason they would have the
same energy there so we'll get to our
bio example on Monday but first what are
the results
[Music]
[Applause]
awesome
congratulations that was unexpected two
new groups all right have a good weekend
see you Monday okay so end of lecture 29
last page we're talking about biological
examples we're talking about transition
metals we're talking about colors of
things and I just wanted to give you an
example of why geometry can matter or be
interesting from a biological context so
the video that you heard about nickel
showed that nickel allows h pylori to
colonize your stomach because the nickel
enzyme creates a buffering system so
that it can survive in the low pH of
your stomach and it's very hard to treat
h pylori infections because the
antibiotics that you would give to kill
the bacteria get destroyed in the
acidity of the stomach so it's a very
hard problem and it's fascinating that
you know they can use this nickle enzyme
to kind of allow themselves to live in
this environment so that's pretty cool
this is also really cool and arguably
more beneficial to mankind so nickel
dependent enzymes also are responsible
for removing a lot of carbon monoxide
and carbon dioxide from the environment
so microbes have these enzymes that
allow them to use carbon monoxide and
carbon dioxide as their carbon source
for metabolism and so collectively these
microbes are estimated to remove about a
hundred million tons of carbon monoxide
from the environment every year and
produce about 1 trillion kilograms of
acetate from greenhouse and other gases
such as co2 so there's a lot of benefit
to us from these nickel enzymes and so
people are interested in doing a couple
different things one thing they're
interested in doing is to see what these
nickel centers look like so that they
can make small molecules to do the same
chemistry people are also interested in
taking these microbes as such and
getting them to over express these
enzymes
and then convert things like co2 a
greenhouse gas into biofuels so some
people in chemical engineering are doing
that right now and they're they're
working with and I'm collaborating with
them on some of these projects so this
is again a very everyone is very
concerned about climate and so this is a
sort of a hot area of research so of
course if you want to know what
something looks like an atomic level
x-ray crystallography is a great thing
to do but if you don't have a crystal
structure you can use spectroscopy in
particular you can think about whether
the enzyme and this nickel Center is
paramagnetic or diamagnetic and that can
help you guess what the geometry of the
metal center is so this is sort of a
first experiment you might try to do to
understand what's going on in your in
your enzyme so say you have a nickel + 2
or D 8 Center and it's found to be
diamagnetic then we could be asked can
you rule out in or out some of the
common geometries for nickel based on
this single observation so let's do that
so we want to add some electrons so I'm
going to go over here and I have our
diagrams on the board
so first octahedral is a common geometry
does it matter if this has a big
splitting or small splitting for a d8
Center what do you think think about it
for a minute let's try it and see so if
we have a small splitting we would go we
put in our three electrons and again
this is a d8 system so we have eight
electrons we put in our three and now we
have to decide if we're going to go up
here or if we're gonna pair but let's
just say let's pretend it's small a
small splitting so we'll put electron up
here then we're done now we have two
pair so we're gonna come back down here
two pair cuz we're gonna put them in the
lowest energy orbitals so we have five
six seven eight and we're done now if we
had said that the splitting was big we
would have paired all of these electrons
first and then put two electrons singly
at the upper
level and that would have given us
actually the exact same diagram so in
this particular case it doesn't matter
whether there's a big splitting or a
small splitting you get the same
electron configuration
so is this diamagnetic or paramagnetic
paramagnetic which means what anything
you have unpaired electrons so we have
unpaired electrons so it's paramagnetic
all right so let's look at the square
planar system now so we have three
orbitals that are down in energy and
because our square planar system is in
the XY plane and it's on axis and we
have so our ligands on axis and our
ligands on axis are
Mougins on access point toward the
orbitals on axis so DX squared minus y
squared is really high in energy XY is a
little bit higher and these guys are
down at the bottom so we don't really
know anything about where we're gonna
put them in but let's just put them in
singly in these lower ones so we'll do 1
2 3 and then we'll pair them up 4 5 6
and then we have 2 more so that's 7 8
and we definitely unless we absolutely
have to don't want to put any electrons
on our d x squared minus y squared
that's way up in energy so we don't want
to do that unless we have to so is this
paramagnetic or diamagnetic diamagnetic
so we have one option here that is
consistent with the spectroscopy now
let's look at tetrahedral its
tetrahedral
when you think is it going to be high
spin or low spin or high spin so we'll
have a small splitting and that is
because in the tetrahedral geometry
you have your ligands are off axis so we
have an opposite of the octahedral
system the orbitals that were higher in
energy more destabilized are now lower
but the ligands aren't really pointing
directly toward any of the d-orbitals so
the splitting overall is much smaller so
this splitting is always going to be
pretty small and so that leads to a high
spin system which is you have the
maximum number of unpaired electrons so
you can always assume it's high spin or
splitting a small so you're going to put
your electrons in singly to the fullest
extent possible before you pair so we'll
put one two three four five six seven
eight
so is this diamagnetic or paramagnetic
paramagnetic so of these three choices
the only one that would be consistent
with the spectroscopy is this player is
the square planar system and that turned
out to be correct
it was a square planar system and so
here's a picture of that square planar
system so here we have the nickel in the
middle and we have four ligands all in
one plane so we have this really nice
square planar geometry that people
predicted would exist before there was
even a crystal structure and so this is
one of the catalysts for allowing
microbes to live on carbon dioxide as
their carbon source which is really an
incredible thing that then an organism
can do little microbes bacteria super
cool they can do all sorts of chemistry
that we struggle to be able to do